and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth
show excited to be joined by jamie
martin today and if you're tuning in
on the video side of things you may see
there's a little bit of flip up as we're
working on the studio background so
don't be too alarmed anyway jamie is a
managing director and founder over at
correct
careers coaching he's an award-winning
sales professional
co-creator of a b2b sales e-learning
course
as well as an author a podcaster and a
speaker jamie a very
welcome squad how are you doing i'm very
good thank you sam thanks for having me
on the show
thrilled to be here and uh yeah look
forward to providing value to the
listeners today
awesome man so it's an interesting topic
and looking forward to jumping straight
in so we're gonna be talking about
all about how we can sell to different
personality types
and why that we need to be aware of them
as business owners of sales or marketing
professions why it's something we need
to
bear in mind um so first and foremost
jamie
why why do we need to why do we need to
care why should i even be bothered if
i'm trying to sell to someone why do i
have to care about what personality type
they may be why has that got to be in my
mind
i'm literally going to start with the
renowned no liking trust
and that is a renowned sales term and it
speaks volumes
people really do buy from people in fact
tony robbins said
people who are like each other tend to
like each other basically
um and and to me you know the selling
environment is different
nowadays in the digital world and the
business environment is different
and people do buy from people they want
to know you as a person
as an individual uh you know platforms
such as linkedin or other social media
channels they're very noisy so
how are people going to remember you
over your competitors over
um many sort of um lead generators
telemarketers
uh sdr's et cetera business development
reps you know approaching you so you've
got to stand out in in the competitive
world
and the way to do that is by building a
rapport identifying different
personalities what their interests
are the finer details of information to
me in in the sales world is absolutely
vital
so if you can actually identify that
type of information at the beginning of
a sales cycle
and approach uh your prospect with this
information
you are certainly going to stand out
against your competition and there's
some various platforms which i'm sure
we'll discuss throughout to be able to
do that and
and ways to be able to identify uh some
interesting personalities
but to me i think it is about you know
generating um
a synergy um and rapport and that's
really going to help you during the
customer buying journey
got it okay so perhaps a good starting
point would be
if you could lay out what are the
different personality types jamie the
ones that we need to be aware of
there is various different types of
personalities i mean so
probably what most people are aware of
is um
introverts extroverts and ambiverts
ambivert is
a mixture of the two i would say i'm
more of an ambivert and um
and i think you know identifying maybe
these types of personalities
uh types uh would help you know rather
than the sales environment being a
quantity
more of a quality kind of approach and
qualifying the the prospect a lot easier
um you can use different types of
psychometrics so there is
the renowned disc profile in the gallop
which is a renowned
global one myers-briggs i've done mars
bridge before myself
and other different types myro um colors
you know types of personality and
psychometrics so you can identify
different personality types but
i think you know i would stick with more
of an introvert extrovert and
ambivert type of personality but bearing
in mind
you could be one of those personality
types and your prospects could be
completely different
that doesn't matter it's probably just
about mirroring and
utilizing body language and
communication styles
to understand how you can build the
rapport and also with
not just with personalities but you know
the communication styles from a
background and degree in psychology i'm
aware of you know
visual learners auditory learners key
aesthetic learners so you've really got
to
communicate effectively with um your
prospects so what's your sort of
thoughts on on those areas sam
yeah interesting stuff so in terms of
dealing with
what i'd like to know jamie to put this
into a tangible
um thing that we could take away
straight away so if we're let's say
we're hopping on a sales call perhaps
we've
we've got an inbound lead or we've got
someone that wants to chat to us we've
got a meeting from our outbound or
inbound activity
how can we tell what personality that
type they are and is that something we
need to pick up straight away
or is it something that will take us a
little bit of time to work it out and
what are some of the signs that we
should look for perhaps for someone um
to be an introvert
an ambiver or an extrovert okay so
strategically
there are some uh uh add-ons
uh you can utilize um you know software
uh to attach to such platforms such as
linkedin so
crystal nose is a very good one and uh
white rabbit ai i don't know if they can
go in the show notes afterwards but
so like platforms such as them do give
you some artificial intelligence some
insight
into um what what interests what likes
what dislikes
um you know personality traits
characteristics
your prospect may be like so that's one
way to start
but another way i would look at it is
you know linkedin
fantastic the number one business of
business platform
uh well over 750 million um
people on there now 30 million companies
and 87 million millennials which i think
is quite fascinating 11
of them in decision making positions so
you know you've got such a platform
which you can utilize and
if your prospect has uh got a you know
an all-star profile on linkedin you can
really identify some
you know information about them the way
they're writing um
you know have they added their awards on
their certificates are they doing any
projects voluntary work charitable work
who are their
influencers their followers who are who
are their network and what they're
posting about on social media
so you can kind of identify some traits
of what they are like
just utilizing that kind of information
okay
all right so is that something we should
be doing kind of pre-cool so if we've
got meetings books appointments booked
say zoom cool skype calls whatever
method of communication we're gonna be
communicating with our potential
customer
we should be looking at their linkedin
profiles and that's going to give us
golden nuggets that we need
to understand their personality type is
that we're saying jamie was there a bit
more to it than that
no absolutely do your due diligence and
your research before calling the
prospect you know this is going to
happen in the sales environment and this
is what i was saying about uh
qualifying a prospect or even
disqualifying uh a prospect you know
looking at their linkedin or looking at
other social media channels of course if
you know facebook is
is the channel for your target market
but definitely utilize this information
because not only that you know even if
it doesn't give you an exact personality
type
you can you know during your opening of
an introductory call you can literally
say
um you know i've seen your some business
news about your company or i have seen
um
you know a social media post about your
dogs or whatever it may be
you really synergize and generate a a
good
opening so you can get the conversation
going and you know we all know about the
80 20 rule or you know
probably different figures nowadays but
the prospects should be talking more and
the way that to get them to communicate
talk more with you is by
you know generally starting a
conversation with an interest or a fact
about
them you know and then you can learn a
lot more about them
and their personality during the earlier
stages of a conversation
and then you can decide okay so should i
mirror their um type of communication
style or if you're over you know video
conferencing nowadays you know their
body language
and really identify maybe what type of
personality they are bearing in mind
though you know depends what size of
business you're you're talking to if
it's a corporate bluetooth company
there will be different decision makers
within the business uh they're all going
to be wanting something different
from your product or service and they're
all going to have different personality
styles
um there's actually an article i've
written about personality types of
decision makers and i referenced that
using the animal kingdom which i thought
was quite
interesting so um if it can be in the
show notes or people do
have a look at my linkedin and the last
article i've written but it literally
says you know
what kind of behaviours they have and
how they will respond to you
um so it might be that you know some
individuals are very analytical i'm
quite analysts called individuals so
i'm not gonna make a decision with you a
transactional decision um
in in a couple of meetings i want to
want to read and review the information
and have a think about it
and you really just got to understand
how you know these types of um you know
nuggets as you said there sam about what
people are like and what they're going
to be like during the customer
buy-in journey and there is just
before we go a bit more jamie because i
want to um understand so
how much of this can we grab pre-cool
research and how much of this like you
said in your case you're
quite an analytical guy so you might not
make a decision there and then
if you're dealing with a sales rep and
you might want to take your time analyze
your options
and think about what makes sense from a
numbers game whereas
some people like myself i don't mess
around too much if i know what i want to
move forward with in business
and i've looked at it beforehand i might
make that decision there and then
um whereas everyone like you say has got
their different way of doing things
different way they like to do business
and get deals over the line
so is is there how much of this can we
get pre-cool how much can we get during
the call perhaps this is what you're
going on to say
and what signs should we look out for to
kind of determine
how we need to approach because the last
thing we want to do is piss people off
by trying to move too fast on a deal
when it turns out that they're that
that's the complete opposite of what
them or what their colleagues
like to do business and then we've lost
the business purely because we've done
what we like to do ourselves
yeah um literally i was just about to
say so we're on the same page and
there's a term called um
science-based selling and it is looking
at the customer so
the behavioral side of the customer um
what they're going through for the
customer buying journey and this this
could be used by various different types
of
psychological techniques and of course
we're not privileged to all of that
information especially if you know we
don't
you know embrace that type of way of you
know doing business and selling
but the principles the same what i would
probably say is for
you know most uh sales professionals
lead generators you know put yourself in
the customer's shoes
um so it isn't really about you as the
salesperson
it is about the customer and so you ask
the question sam so how much
information do we need before during and
you know during the follow-up process
if how long is a piece of string it is
it's going to be
based upon individuals so i would
definitely say you know spend a good
i don't want to put a time on it but say
20 30 minutes um you know doing your
your social media research of someone
because that that
information is uh readily accessible um
and then you can find a little bit of
information you know like i said to open
a conversation build rapport early on
um you know whether you're on a video
conference or a phone call or
even by your email if you can't get all
of them and you know really try and get
that information to
you know build synergy straight away and
then during the call you can ask
these open questions and and continue to
ask questions to identify okay so
first of all you know are you the
decision maker uh what problems do you
have
what value are you looking for you know
how you use any competitors whatever it
may be you know really
then ask these questions and find out as
much information you can
about you know obviously trying to move
that conversation on
during the sales process during these
types of um
techniques you can identify okay so if
someone's you know
seeming like they're very busy or
they're providing you know closed
answers back
then you might understand okay so their
personality type may be someone who just
wants facts and figures
um or they just need uh to understand
the outcome
um or your you know your testimonials
and what's worked before so you really
want to tailor
your communication and your answers
based on what they're actually like
during the call
or video conference meeting or whatever
it may be and then towards the end i
mean you know follow-up is usually one
of the areas that people
aren't persistent with and you really
got to educate
individuals to say that it's not that
someone isn't interested unless they
actually say no
it might just be that they have to go to
other decision makers
or they need time to review it like i
said i probably would um
or asked is there any other information
i can provide to you so
you know to answer the question it's
going to be different for everyone but i
think the more you can find out about an
individual as a person
what their likes are what their
interests are like what their
personality style may be
and their behaviors then you can kind of
then mirror that
during the whole customer buying
experience and i will say from my
experience in selling that
the final nuggets of or detail of
information
you find out about a person record it
write it down on your crm system or
even if you're using a spreadsheet for
example if i contacted i do remember
ringing
um it was a sales director of a renowned
company you know corporate company
and i rang them about quarter to nine on
a monday morning and like
what are you doing you're crazy you know
but that was the time i got hold of him
so i'm gonna bring that person back
exactly the same time and date next week
and those little bit of information can
really help you in in the sales
environment
okay so what i've gathered there jamie
it's also about
great asking great questions so
as simple as it sounds really
understanding their world
asking more about perhaps their problems
the project they want to get done their
goals
their buying cycle so literally asking
him how they do business rather than
assuming that they might want to follow
your
sales process which in most of my mind
in mind especially if i'm talking to
someone obviously you want to get the
deal over the line as quickly as
possible but we want to make sure that
the project is a good fit for us
we want to make sure that they're on the
same page that their goals are in line
with
how we do business and what we can
actually deliver and making sure they've
of course got the budget to work with us
i guess understanding their cell cycle
so in your case
it's it might be a little bit slower
than someone like me who tends to move
quite fast
and it might be they've got a measure
which everyone's got their way of doing
business so
i guess just weighing those up right and
just understanding how
how they're going to go about it and
putting their needs ahead of yours is
that about right or are we off the mark
no absolutely you reiterate reiterated
that perfectly you know
it's about the decision maker basically
and really finding out you know so
what are they looking for you know if
you're having a discovery call with
someone or you're on their second sort
of video conference meeting they are
interested in buying from you because
they wouldn't be spending the time on it
so you really gotta identify okay so
what's next and really guide your
decision maker through
the process of what you take them during
the customer buying journey
but it is about them as an individual so
you know what type of information are
you looking for
uh the question stage of um a discovery
call or a
business relationship conversation is
absolutely vital because you can really
identify
you know what they're looking for is are
they want to save time
do they want to save money um you know
are they looking for long-lasting
relationships obviously it's going to
depend on the value and the volume of of
the actual product or service you
provide them
but the more information you can get
them by asking questions building
rapport
and to be honest um all that all that be
well and set
you know you you the relationship
absolutely um part of the call is
is probably i would say is the most
important thing because they're going to
remember you
um when you when you don't follow up
with them and communicate with them
again you've already built a rapport so
they're happy to you know
reciprocate with yourself um and and
even if they don't want to buy from you
now due to needs of their business
when you then follow up with them and
say you know a quarter or a week or you
know six months time
then they they will want to speak to you
again some some deals i've done in
recruitment specifically may have taken
about nine months but because i built
such a strong relationship with them
really got to know them
built a synergy each other's interests
and you know understand the different
ways of uh their personalities and what
their likes and you know
their behaviors then that's really
helped me uh later on at later date to
to convert the sale
okay interesting now you mentioned
earlier
in just after we started the recording
that
things like mirroring um which is quite
an old-school sales strategy
that a lot of trainers still use and i'm
not saying it's bad not saying it's good
um but it's interesting is that
something we should be adapting for
example
if we're chatting to an extrovert and
they're perhaps very very loud they're
very very fast paced and the way they're
talking they say hi jamie you really
want to get this deal done tell me all
about your company
tell me what the price is tell what the
timeline is tell me no no no no let's
move fast
should we be mirroring exactly if we're
chatting to them in that loud fast pace
should be trying to
repeat that ourselves and likewise if
you've got someone on the other end of
the scale
and they're talking to us quite calm
quite collectively
they're quite quite a slow pace is that
something we need to be adapting
or are there any other things that you
recommend that we do jamie
once we understand um the buyers
personality
um yeah and and how they like to do
business that we should be mirroring or
or perhaps using other techniques
well yes it's certainly an integral
question and i'm sure
anyone who's had sales training would
have experienced that type of you know
mirroring or you know using body
language to
uh help the buy-in process my my honest
thoughts are
i don't think you should change as a
person i think you don't you demonstrate
authenticity
and credibility by who you are so
although you
are aware someone you know is maybe an
extrovert or maybe an introvert or
their communication style may be
different to yourself you can certainly
adapt
yourself to communicate with them in in
the way they want to so
to say they are an individual who wants
to receive quite a bit of information
then there's no point in you just
talking and talking and talking
to them to convince them to buy you are
aware that they want to review
information
so you can sort of guide them through
the main points of the conversation and
then follow up with the information
requested
so you can certainly adapt your behavior
um to suit
the need of the prospect but i don't
think you should change as a person so
if if someone i mean i naturally speak
quite quickly because i'm always
passionate
and energized all the time um
i would expect someone to change you
know to be exactly like me and me to be
exactly like them
you know you are who you are for a
reason so i think you can certainly um
you know make sure you are communicating
with
them in the way they want to be but i
think they're going to remember you more
by the consistency
so if you if you change the way you are
initially on the call just to suit
you know them as a personality type then
the next few times you have to continue
to do the same so
the honest answer be yourself because
they will remember you and if they're
going to want to work with you they're
going to want to work with you if if you
don't have a synergy
you don't have this energy you can't
change the person you are but i would
say
that you know it is important to make
sure you are ticking the boxes
to them so just understanding you know
have they understood
what you said and how you've said it so
it was just asking the open questions
um did you want to go over any more
information uh what type of information
are you looking for in my follow-up so
just just just you know
clarify clarify with them you know what
it is they are wanting from you at that
time
i think that that's probably the best um
advice i would give for that
at that point because like i said you
can't change who you are um
but again like i said so if someone was
an extrovert
their main target market might actually
be introverts so it's not that they need
to change as a person
they might just need to do a bit of um
due diligence to understand
what their introverts um target market
is like
so it might be that they prefer to
communicate over linkedin and direct
messages
um so that might be a good communication
style one of my clients um we actually
communicate over whatsapp
um so you know it's finding out the
behavior of the of your prospect
and then adapting your behavior to suit
their needs that's what i think i would
say to the listeners taken away from
this is you know finding out
how they prefer to communicate you know
again we use video conferencing now more
than ever obviously you know during a
pandemic and in a digital world
but some people still like to speak on
the phone and that might be because
you know they're more of an auditory
listener um so it's just
you could even ask the question how do
you prefer to communicate or what method
do you prefer to communicate with i
think that's you know probably uh
a top tip to take away and then that's
really going to help you every
communication you have with your
prospect such a good point
such a good point um yeah it's
interesting isn't it because some
prospects you will never get hold of
them on the phone but then you might
connect with them on linkedin
and then they'll start messaging you
back straight away once you're connected
or you might try them on whatsapp and
they'd like that or you might
have text or whatever it may be but what
you thought initially would be the best
way to get hold of them
it's completely opposite or sometimes i
like a mix of all three or four channels
or whatever maybe email call voicemail
and skype whatsapp zoom whatever it may
be um
but yes it's a great point it's really
like you said just simply asking the
question which channel works best for
communication
it doesn't matter what you like it's
what about what your ideal customer
likes
and if they prefer whatsapp then crack
on with whatsapp if you want to get that
business over the line
um okay well we've covered quite a bit
about research discovery
and kind of throughout the kind of start
and middle of the sales process
in terms of let's say closing deals
bringing
business in are there any things we need
to consider
in terms of that side of things um jamie
actually getting the deals over the line
or is it more important that we just ask
these questions
during that sales process so we
understand how that what the decision
criteria is for them
have we already covered that or is there
other things that we need to consider
yeah i mean during um a sales
conversation or
um a pitch you know it is about
needs-based selling
so the more open questions you ask and
and
actively listening to your prospect you
are going to identify you know what
areas that you need to provide them
during the negotiation stages during the
the closing
parts of the conversation so i think
it's really about
you know finding out you know problems
they may have had or what solutions
they're looking for
and and what value um and your usps your
unique selling points you can provide to
them back that up with case studies
testimonials
um analogies etc and then you can
certainly provide that information in in
the closing stages
um what i would probably say you know in
in a busy world um
a noisy sales environment is that you
know most prospects they probably would
look for
um you know to go to a couple of your
competition um to whether whether cost
isn't uh you know um one of the most
elements they want to consider
uh or whether it's um looking at your
credentials whatever it may be
so i think during the um probably second
pitch stage which that would be done in
a face-to-face video conference in style
meeting
you know maybe do something different
something that stand out and something
that's personalized so
i was having this conversation with a
customer yesterday actually you know
um you know looking at tailoring a
proposal based on their needs and what
they're looking for so making sure you
ask the right questions you know
if if it's if cost was a an objection of
theirs
then maybe do an introductory um offer
um or if it was terms and conditions
like payment terms then you know look at
how you can sort of
you know change your sort of um terms
and conditions to suit their needs so so
that's what's really important during
the question stage but
what i mean about personalizing and
being innovative and creative
well you know for example say you were
going to proposal um or
after the first introductory
conversation had with them why don't you
send them a video message
and say you know it's great to speak
with you these are the main points we've
addressed um
looking forward to our next conversation
um let me know if you need anything
prior
or here's my follow-up proposal um you
know personalize on on the points you
are looking for
because i think most people would
probably say is that
we don't want to see loads and loads of
information nowadays because we are
comparing and we are bombarded
so if you personalize it and give them
you know precise
exact type of information they're
looking for they're then generally
looking to probably proceed quicker with
you
during the buy-in cycle because you have
kind of adhered to what they are looking
for
but also giving them the direct
information but yeah again like using
video
nowadays we know it's absolutely vital
because it covers you know auditory
visual not necessarily key aesthetic
yeah unless virtual reality comes out
soon
and we can utilize that over video
conferencing uh that would be helpful
for a product selling anyway
um but yeah it's just it's just about
doing something different um during the
the customer cycle but follow-up i will
say is that you know a timely fashion do
it
as soon as possible um and i get them
you know to obviously come back to you
as soon as possible because that's
usually that i'm aware of some clients
um
losing customers during the buying cycle
great point
great point and um you executed the
follow-up perfectly jamie as
well we're fortunate enough with the
show now that we get many many guest
applications
but you're persistent you messed your
link didn't you mess with an email i
mean we managed to book it in over time
um so executed that spot on yourself my
friend
um now that's one thing that might be
interesting so
we've talked about most ends of the
sales so but in terms of follow-up is
that again something we need to take
into consideration
people's personality type because we
know no one really likes to be hounded
with a constant email reminder just
checking up how this deal is doing just
checking if you're ready to buy i just
wanted to see if you're ready to buy
today
that doesn't help anyone you're not
offering any value we all know that now
or we should do
um is there any ways that we
that you found quite effective um jamie
when you're talking different
personality types
in terms of effective ways to follow up
whether it's via video whether it's via
cool or email and different different
ways to try for different types of
people
yeah i mean first of all i would i would
set expectations so
my my experience is that if i respond to
someone
very quickly and we're talking within
the the hour of uh
of the conversation you've had with them
it shows the prospect
that this is the way you work as an
individual
and you're efficient um you're you're um
you know direct and what you need to be
able to do and you are obviously
passionate about working with that
um customer or client and then they know
that's how you will work with them
moving forward so my advice is
follow up straight away you are then
going to probably
have to wait a certain period of time
for the
prospect to come back to you and that's
that's the part where i think it needs
to be based on
you know what your decision maker may be
like so i think it's just probably
first of all clarifying questions such
as you know
you know is there any other decision
makers involved of what sort of time
frame are you looking at to respond to
me
and then you can do some touch points
during the follow-up process which
doesn't look too persistent
so just checking you receive the
information is there anything else i can
provide to you
do you do you want to have another
conversation in case there wasn't
anything clarified in in our first
couple of interactions i think
is probably the best answers there um
then what i would probably also say is
that different personality types you
know whether they
are reviewing the information
analytically um whether they
they just want to hear a cost you know
you've got to be aware of that in in the
follow-up process
but like i said don't feel despondent if
someone hasn't come back to you straight
away
um or they haven't brought from you
straight away you know most
relationships and
and and deals are done over time um and
you know it's even if they don't come
back to you in a couple months it might
be that they do business with you in in
say three to six months time
so so your your cadence your series of
actions and your touch points should
still be there
and that that would lead us on to uh you
know account managing effectively
and even if that was a prospect so what
can you do with that um prospect maybe
in a week or two time or maybe in a
month's time and it might be just
sending them some sort of
um value gift whether it's white paper
or whether it's um some how-to tips or
whatever the articles you've written
you know just to just to keep in touch
but in in a very sort of um
nice way really so those would be some
of my advice on on following up with
yeah i like it just it sounds like
staying top of mind so even if you know
that
that particular deal might take a few
weeks a few months to come in
rather than pestering some of them
actually sending them useful materials
like you mentioned whether it's a white
paper a guide
a video a podcast whatever form of media
it is that you know is actually
useful and relevant to the the
conversation you've been having so
rather than just sending the same old
follow-up emails or calls
you're actually providing them something
that they're generally going to find
interesting
and at the same time keeps you at the
top of mind when they're ready to do the
business i guess
absolutely you know as just to go full
cycle back to where we started
you know people are kind of buying from
people so you know the more you are
building relationships then the more
they are likely to come back to you
and again if they mention something
during the initial interactions you had
with them
maybe it might be about you know a
certain industry topic or business news
or market insights or whatever it may be
if you see something like that send them
a link to you say oh you know remember
we talked about this
just thought this might be useful the
more you go above and beyond the more
you personalize
um your your touch points with a
prospect the more they're going to
remember
you i mean if we talk about sort of like
neuroscience and
you know emotionally buy-in it is about
how we feel when we buy
and if you can you know provide trust
and
and likeability and authenticity with
your prospect
then you know at the point when they are
ready to buy from yourself whether it's
immediately or you know in a few months
time
you you really help them during that
customer buying experience by how you
presented
and demonstrated yourself and there's
been various examples i can give you
know how i won business just by
you know just you know making sure that
i follow up efficiently i provide them
the information they're looking for
i'm aware of you know how they like to
communicate um and then i make sure that
i follow up with them you know just to
keep in touch like you said sam be at
the forefront of their mind
and then they do come back to you to buy
jamie that was a perfect way to wrap it
up mate with that i want to thank you
very much for coming on sir
and do tell us more about how people can
learn from you how people can connect
with you and the best way to get in such
yeah uh appreciate being a guest on your
show sam you know really enjoyed that
conversation
uh my um you know primarily um
communicator tool is
in so if you want to connect with me uh
miss jamie martin with bsc
ons on linkedin be happy to connect but
my website is correctcareerscoaching.com
excellent thank you so much sir so we'll
put everything on the show description
over at businessgrowth.marketing
thanks once again jamie really
appreciate you coming on thanks again
sam
cheers man if you enjoyed the show be
sure to hit subscribe on your podcast
channel of choice
we interview business leaders each and
every week to provide actionable tips
across sales
marketing all to help you grow your
business and thanks again we'll catch
you on the next episode